# EDS 223: Spatial Analysis for Environmental Data Science - Wind Power Potential in Iowa
## Student authors: Mia Forsline & Alexandra Yousefivand
### Due 2021-12-03
### Course instructor: Dr. James Frew
### [Course website](https://jamesfrew.github.io/EDS_223_spatial_analysis/)

## Course description
Spatial analysis, broadly defined, is the study of the relationships between phenomena as a function of their positions and extents in two or more dimensions. When at least two of those dimensions correspond to the Earth’s surface, we are analyzing geographic information, the fundamental substrate of environmental science.

EDS 223 / ESM 267 takes a programming approach to geographic information: instead of using a geographic information system (GIS) application (e.g., ArcGIS; QGIS), we will be manipulating and analyzing geographic information by writing programs in R and Python. This approach gives you a deeper understanding of the underlying operations and data structures that support geographic information, and is also much more flexible in terms of the problems you can address—you’re not limited to the capabilities built into a particular GIS application.

## Motivation and project goal
The goal of this project is to evaluate the maximum potential annual wind energy production available to the state of Iowa; i.e., the number of megawatt hours (MWh) that would be generated by placing as many 3.45 MW wind turbines as possible on all appropriate sites. This analysis is useful to establish cost and benefit boundaries for renewable energy projects in Iowa to mitigate the climate crisis.

## Intended purpose and important concepts
As this project is intended for educational purposes, the student authors practiced the following:
- connecting to a PostGIS database
- integrating SQL queries into a jupyter-notebook
- merging multiple SQL subqueries
- implementing spatial overlay
- calculating energy production
- calling assigned variables in printed text to report reproducible results

## Future research
Future research aims to inform policy regarding renewable wind energy in the United States and abroad. Additionally, further research could explore different scenarios, other than the two housing scenarios included in this study.

## Installation
The following packages were utilized during this analysis:
- `sqlalchemy`
- `psycopg2`
- `geopandas`
- `math`

## Data
Due to large file sizes, data for this analysis is NOT hosted in the repository. Data can be accessed from [OpenStreetMap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=4/38.01/-95.84) and uses the following file structure.

- spatial-databases-wind-power-potential-21 (_repository_)
    - README.md
    - HW4.ipynb
    
- OpenStreetMap (_data_)  
    - osmiowa
        - planet_osm_line
        - planet_osm_point
        - planet_osm_polygon
        - wind_cells_10000

Original assignment instructions can be found [here](https://jamesfrew.github.io/EDS_223_spatial_analysis/assignments/4/HW4.html). 
